The right problem, the wrong solution

Judge VanDyke wrote a concurrence. I agree with his premise but reject his remedy.

His premise is that the Ninth Circuit has been inconsistent in the way it handles appeals involving the determination of “persecution”:

I write separately to highlight the growing inconsistency with which our court has handled cases involving similar facts and issues. Our court’s derogation from the basic principle of justice that like cases should be decided alike … warrants a course correction.

He gives examples of the Ninth deciding similar cases in different ways. He concludes with an observation familiar to practitioners:

Let’s be honest, the outcome of a petition often hinges solely on which judges are drawn for the panel.

He is referring to his colleagues on the Ninth Circuit. But, let’s be honest, his observation applies a fortiori to the IJ who is assigned to hear the initial petition.

Nobody could fail to applaud his appeal to the ideal that “like cases should be decided alike”. Practitioners know that the single most important factor in an asylum claim is which judge is assigned. When we get a new case, the very first thing we do is look up the IJ in the TRAC database and check their asylum denial rates.

VanDyke’s solution, however, is no solution at all: he proposes to save the appellate courts from inconsistency by having them consistently defer to the immigration judge! He exalts “the especially appropriate deference to executive-branch decisions in this particular area of the law mandated by Congress”: 

Whether certain incidents rise to the level of past persecution is an inherently imprecise and difficult factual inquiry. There is no one objective answer to the question of whether a petitioner has suffered real past persecution. It is an inherently fact-bound endeavor. And questions of fact are to be reviewed with deference.

In other words, he admits that “persecution” is difficult to define, and therefore proposes to accept whatever definition (or lack thereof) that an IJ chooses to apply in a particular case.

In the current political climate, the realities of such a policy are particularly deplorable. Immigration judges are overtly pressured to deny applications. Sympathetic judges (and pretty much all the women) are fired. The job of IJ has been renamed “deportation judge”. ‘Tis the season, if ever there was one, for enhanced judicial scrutiny.

But we needn’t appeal to the politics of the moment. A court has the duty to require consistent application of the law across changes in administration. VanDyke proposes to abandon that duty. The most important concept in asylum law — the reason that asylum exists in the first place — is persecution. He would permit each administration, even each IJ, to redefine that concept willy-nilly.

In technical terms, VanDyke’s position is incomprehensible. He freely admits that the word “persecution” is not well defined. But he asserts that the application of a vague standard to a concrete set of facts is a “fact-bound endeavor”, not a legal one. In fact, the opposite is true. It’s hard to imagine a clearer example of a mixed question of fact and law demanding de novo review than the question of whether a given experience is persecution.

In non-technical terms, when judges routinely decide identical cases in different ways, it’s a sign that the appellate courts should show less deference, not more.

At the moment, I am working with two asylum seekers. One has a judge who denies 93% of asylum claims; the other, a judge who denies 12%. Against that background, how important are the merits of their cases? 